start of 'data manipulation' examples (#46979)
ansible/ansible: docs/docsite/rst/user_guide/complex_data_manipulation.rst

> Complex data manipulation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _complex_data_manipulation:

*************************
Complex data manipulation
```

> #########################

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*************************
```

> In many cases you need to do some complex operation with your variables, while Ansible is not recommended as a data processing/manipulation tool, you can use the existing Jinja2 templating in conjunction with the many added ansible filters, lookups and tests to do some very complex transformations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In many cases you need to do some complex operation with your variables. Although Ansible is not recommended as a data processing/manipulation tool, you can use the existing Jinja2 templating in conjunction with the many added Ansible filters, lookups and tests to do some very complex transformations.
```

> In many cases you need to do some complex operation with your variables, while Ansible is not recommended as a data processing/manipulation tool, you can use the existing Jinja2 templating in conjunction with the many added ansible filters, lookups and tests to do some very complex transformations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In many cases, you need to do some complex operation with your variables, while Ansible is not recommended as a data processing/manipulation tool, you can use the existing Jinja2 templating in conjunction with the many added Ansible filters, lookups and tests to do some very complex transformations.
```

> A quick definition of each type of plugin before we go forward

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's start with a quick definition of each type of plugin:
```

>   - lookups: Mainly used to query 'external data', in Ansible these were the primary part of loops using the `with_<lookup>` construct, but they can be used independantly to return data for processing. They normally returna list due to their primary function in loops as mentioned previouslly. Used with the ``lookup`` or ``query`` Jinja2 operators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - lookups: mainly used to query 'external data', and in loops using the ``with_<lookup>`` construct. Lookup plugins can also be used independently to return data for processing. They normally return a list due to their primary function in loops. Used with the ``lookup`` or ``query`` Jinja2 operators.
```

>   - lookups: Mainly used to query 'external data', in Ansible these were the primary part of loops using the `with_<lookup>` construct, but they can be used independantly to return data for processing. They normally returna list due to their primary function in loops as mentioned previouslly. Used with the ``lookup`` or ``query`` Jinja2 operators.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - lookups: Mainly used to query 'external data', in Ansible these were the primary part of loops using the ``with_<lookup>`` construct, but they can be used independently to return data for processing. They normally return a list due to their primary function in loops as mentioned previously. Used with the ``lookup`` or ``query`` Jinja2 operators.
```

  - filters: used to change/transform data, used with the ``|`` Jinja2 operator.
  - tests: used to validate data, used with the ``is`` Jinja2 operator.

.. _note:
   * Some tests and filters are provided directly by Jinja2, so their aviailability depends on the Jinja2 version, not Ansible.

.. _for_loops_or_list_comprehensions:

> For loops and/or list comprehensions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``For`` loops and/or list comprehensions
```

====================================

> Most programmers are used to using a for loop (or while and others) and list comprehensions to do transformations on lists or lists of objects, Jinja2 has a few filters that provide this functionality: map, select, reject, selectattr, rejectattr

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most programmers are used to using a ``for`` loop (or ``while``, etc.) and list comprehensions to do transformations on lists or lists of objects, Jinja2 has a few filters that provide this functionality: ``map``, ``select``, ``reject``, ``selectattr``, and ``rejectattr``.
```

>  - map: this is a basic for loop that just allows you to change every item in a list, using the 'attribute' keyword you can do the transformation based on a attribute of the list element.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - map: this is a basic ``for`` loop that allows you to change every item in a list, using the 'attribute' keyword you can do the transformation based on an attribute of the list element.
```

>  - select/reject: this is a for loop with a conditional, that allows you to create a subset of a list that matches (or not) a condition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - select/reject: this is a ``for`` loop with a conditional, that allows you to create a subset of a list that matches (or not) a condition.
```

>  - selectattr/rejectattr: very similar to the above but it uses a specific attribute of the list element for the conditional

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - selectattr/rejectattr: very similar to select/reject, but using a specific attribute of the list element for the conditional.
```

:orphan:

.. _complex_data_manipulation:

Complex data manipulation
#########################

In many cases, you need to do some complex operation with your variables, while Ansible is not recommended as a data processing/manipulation tool, you can use the existing Jinja2 templating in conjunction with the many added Ansible filters, lookups and tests to do some very complex transformations.

A quick definition of each type of plugin before we go forward

>   - lookups: Mainly used to query 'external data', in Ansible these were the primary part of loops using the ``with_<lookup>`` construct, but they can be used independently to return data for processing. They normally returna a list due to their primary function in loops as mentioned previously. Used with the ``lookup`` or ``query`` Jinja2 operators.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - lookups: Mainly used to query 'external data', in Ansible these were the primary part of loops using the ``with_<lookup>`` construct, but they can be used independently to return data for processing. They normally return a list due to their primary function in loops as mentioned previously. Used with the ``lookup`` or ``query`` Jinja2 operators.
```

  - filters: used to change/transform data, used with the ``|`` Jinja2 operator.
  - tests: used to validate data, used with the ``is`` Jinja2 operator.

.. _note:
   * Some tests and filters are provided directly by Jinja2, so their aviailability depends on the Jinja2 version, not Ansible.

.. _for_loops_or_list_comprehensions:

For loops and/or list comprehensions
====================================

> Most programmers are used to using a ``for`` loop (or ``while``, etc) and list comprehensions to do transformations on lists or lists of objects, Jinja2 has a few filters that provide this functionality: ``map``, ``select``, ``reject``, ``selectattr``, ``rejectattr``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Most programmers are used to use loops (``for``, ``while``, etc) and list comprehensions to do transformations on lists including lists of objects, Jinja2 has a few filters that provide this functionality: ``map``, ``select``, ``reject``, ``selectattr``, ``rejectattr``.
```

>   - map: this is a basic for loop that just allows you to change every item in a list, using the 'attribute' keyword you can do the transformation based on a attribute of the list element.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - map: this is a basic for loop that just allows you to change every item in a list, using the 'attribute' keyword you can do the transformation based on attributes of the list elements.
```
or
```suggestion
  - map: this is a basic for loop that just allows you to change every item in a list, using the 'attribute' keyword you can do the transformation based on an attribute of the list elements.
```

>   - select/reject: this is a for loop with a conditional, that allows you to create a subset of a list that matches (or not) a condition

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - select/reject: this is a for loop with a condition, that allows you to create a subset of a list that matches (or not) based on the result of the condition.
```

>   - selectattr/rejectattr: very similar to the above but it uses a specific attribute of the list element for the conditional

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - selectattr/rejectattr: very similar to the above but it uses a specific attribute of the list elements for the conditional statement.
```
or
```suggestion
  - selectattr/rejectattr: very similar to the above but it uses a specific attribute of the list elements for the condition.
```

                    - type: routed
                      version: 1.0
                    - type: bridged
                      version: 1.1

Results in:

.. code::

    ok: [localhost] => {
        "msg": [
            "routed",
            "bridged",
            "routed",
            "bridged"
        ]
    }

.. _find_mount_point:

Find mount point
----------------
In this case, we want to find the mount point for a given path across our machines, since we already collect mount facts, we can use the following:

.. code::

   - hosts: all
     gather_facts: True
     vars:
        path: /var/lib/cache
     tasks:
     - name: The mount point for {{path}}, found using the Ansible mount facts
       debug: msg="{{(ansible_facts.mounts|selectattr('mount', 'in', path)|list|sort(attribute='mount'))[-1]['mount']}}"

Omit elements from a list
-------------------------

The special ``omit`` variable ONLY works with module options, but we can still use it in other ways as an identifier to tailor a list of elements:

.. code::

    - name: enable a list of windows features, by name
      win_feature:
        # here we filter out any 'omit' tokens we find in the supplied list

>         name: '{{ namestuff|reject('equal_to', omit)|list }}'

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        name: '{{ namestuff|reject("equalto", omit)|list }}'
```
or
```suggestion
        name: "{{ namestuff|reject('equalto', omit)|list }}"
```

      state: absent
      vars:
        namestuff:
            # here we make this option 'omittable' by assigning the 'omit' token on a condition
          - "{{ (fs_installed_smb_v1|default(False))|ternary(omit, 'FS-SMB1') }}"
          - "foo"
          - "bar"

Another way is to avoid adding elements to the list in the first place, so you can just use it directly:

.. code::

    - name: build unique list with some items conditionally omittted
      set_fact:
         namestuff: ' {{ (namestuff|default([]))|union([item]) }}'
      when: item != omit
      loop:
          - "{{ (fs_installed_smb_v1|default(False))|ternary(omit, 'FS-SMB1') }}"
          - "foo"
          - "bar"

.. _complex_type_transfomations:

Complex Type transformations
=============================

> Jinja provides filters for simple data type tranformations (int, bool, etc), but when you want to tranform data structures things are not as easy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Jinja provides filters for simple data type transformations (int, bool, etc), but when you want to transform data structures things are not as easy.
```

> You can use the loops and list comprehensions as shown above to help, also other filters and lookups can be chained and leverage to achieve these comlex transformations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use loops and list comprehensions as shown above to help, also other filters and lookups can be chained and leveraged to achieve more complex transformations.
```

.. _create_dictionary_from_list:

Create dictionary from list
---------------------------

> In most languages it is easy to create a dictionary (aka map/associatve array/hash/etc) from a list of pairs, in Ansible there are a couple of ways to do it and the best one for you might depend on the source of your data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In most languages it is easy to create a dictionary (aka map/associative array/hash/etc) from a list of pairs, in Ansible there are multiple ways to do this and the best one for you might depend on the data source.
```
or
```suggestion
In most languages it is easy to create a dictionary (aka map/associative array/hash/etc) from a list of pairs, in Ansible there are a couple of ways to do it and the best one for you might depend on the source of your data.
```

These example produces ``{"a": "b", "c": "d"}``

.. code::

  vars:
      single_list: [ 'a', 'b', 'c', 'd' ]
      mydict: "{{ dict(singlelist) }}"

A bit more complex, using ``set_fact`` and a ``loop`` to create/update a dictionary with key value pairs from 2 lists:

.. code::

     - name: Uses 'combine' to update the dictionary and 'zip' to make pairs of both lists
       set_fact:
         mydict: "{{ mydict|default({}) | combine({item[0]: item[1]}) }}"
       loop: "{{ (keys| zip(values))|list }}"
       vars:
         keys:
           - foo
           - var
           - bar
         values:
           - a
           - b
           - c

This results in ``{"foo": "a", "var": "b", "bar": "c"}``.

You can even combine these simple examples with other filters and looups to create a dictionary dynamically by matching patterns to variable names:

.. code::

    vars:
      myvarnames: "{{q('varnames', '^my')}}"
      mydict: "{{ dict(myvarnames | zip(q('vars', \*myvarnames))) }}"

> A quick explanation, since there is a lot to unpack from those 2 lines

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A quick explanation, since there is a lot to unpack from these 2 lines
```

>  - The 'varnames' lookup returns a list of variables that matches 'begin with "my"'

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - The 'varnames' lookup returns a list of variables that match 'begin with "my"'
```

>  - When feedng the list from the prevuois step into the 'vars' lookup to get the list of values.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - When feeding the list from the previous step into the 'vars' lookup to get the list of values.
```
or should it be
```suggestion
 - Than the list from the previous step is feed into the 'vars' lookup to get the list of values.
```

Reviewer 4: In the second suggestion, it should be `Then` and not `Than`.

>    The ``*`` is used to 'dereference the list' (a pythonism that works in Jinja), otherwise it would take the list as one argument.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   The ``*`` is used to 'dereference the list' (a pythonism that works in Jinja), otherwise it would take the list as a single argument.
```

.. _complex_data_manipulation:

Complex data manipulation
#########################

In many cases, you need to do some complex operation with your variables, while Ansible is not recommended as a data processing/manipulation tool, you can use the existing Jinja2 templating in conjunction with the many added Ansible filters, lookups and tests to do some very complex transformations.

A quick definition of each type of plugin before we go forward
  - lookups: Mainly used to query 'external data', in Ansible these were the primary part of loops using the ``with_<lookup>`` construct, but they can be used independently to return data for processing. They normally return a list due to their primary function in loops as mentioned previously. Used with the ``lookup`` or ``query`` Jinja2 operators.
  - filters: used to change/transform data, used with the ``|`` Jinja2 operator.
  - tests: used to validate data, used with the ``is`` Jinja2 operator.

.. _note:

>    * Some tests and filters are provided directly by Jinja2, so their aviailability depends on the Jinja2 version, not Ansible.

Reviewer 5: `aviailability` = `availability`

Most programmers are used to use loops (``for``, ``while``, etc) and list comprehensions to do transformations on lists including lists of objects, Jinja2 has a few filters that provide this functionality: ``map``, ``select``, ``reject``, ``selectattr``, ``rejectattr``.

  - map: this is a basic for loop that just allows you to change every item in a list, using the 'attribute' keyword you can do the transformation based on attributes of the list elements.

  - select/reject: this is a for loop with a condition, that allows you to create a subset of a list that matches (or not) based on the result of the condition.
  - selectattr/rejectattr: very similar to the above but it uses a specific attribute of the list elements for the conditional statement.

.. _keys_from_dict_matching_list:

Extract keys from a dictionary matching elements from a list
------------------------------------------------------------

The equivalent Python code would be:

.. code-block:: python

    for chain in chains:
        for config in chains_config[chain]['configs']:
            print(config['type'])

There are several ways to do it in Ansible, this is just one example:

> .. code-block:: YAML+Jinja2

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: YAML+Jinja
```

 :emphasize-lines: 3
 :caption: Way to extract matching keys from a list of dictionaries

  tasks:
    - name: Show extracted list of keys from a list of dictionaries
      debug: msg="{{ chains|map('extract', chains_config)|map(attribute='configs')|flatten|map(attribute='type')|flatten }}"
      vars:
        chains = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
        chains_config:
            1:
                foo: bar
                configs:
                    - type: routed
                      version: 0.1
                    - type: bridged
                      version: 0.2
            2:
                foo: baz
                configs:
                    - type: routed
                      version: 1.0
                    - type: bridged
                      version: 1.1

> .. code-block::

Reviewer 4: I think you explicitly need to specify the language for the code-block if you have more parameters (like `:caption:` and `:emphasize-lines:`). I think that's causing (most of) the errors.

 :caption: Results of debug task, a list with the extracted keys

    ok: [localhost] => {
        "msg": [
            "routed",
            "bridged",
            "routed",
            "bridged"
        ]
    }

.. _find_mount_point:

Find mount point
----------------
In this case, we want to find the mount point for a given path across our machines, since we already collect mount facts, we can use the following:

.. code-block::

>  :caption: Use selectattr to filter mounts into list i can then sort and select the last from

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 :caption: Use selectattr to filter mounts into list I can then sort and select the last from
```

      set_fact:
         namestuff: ' {{ (namestuff|default([]))|union([item]) }}'
      when: item != omit
      loop:
          - "{{ (fs_installed_smb_v1|default(False))|ternary(omit, 'FS-SMB1') }}"
          - "foo"
          - "bar"

.. _complex_type_transfomations:

Complex Type transformations
=============================

Jinja provides filters for simple data type tranformations (int, bool, etc), but when you want to tranform data structures things are not as easy.
You can use the loops and list comprehensions as shown above to help, also other filters and lookups can be chained and leverage to achieve these comlex transformations.

.. _create_dictionary_from_list:

Create dictionary from list
---------------------------

In most languages it is easy to create a dictionary (aka map/associative array/hash/etc) from a list of pairs, in Ansible there are a couple of ways to do it and the best one for you might depend on the source of your data.

These example produces ``{"a": "b", "c": "d"}``

.. code-block:: YAML+Jinja
 :caption: Simple list to dict by assuming the list is [key, value , key, value, ...]

  vars:
      single_list: [ 'a', 'b', 'c', 'd' ]

>       mydict: "{{ dict(singlelist) }}"

Reviewer 6: There's a missing underscore in the variable name. It should be:
`mydict: "{{ dict(single_list) }}"`

Reviewer 7: You speak about a list of pairs, but that would be `[('a', 'b'), ('c', 'd')]`.

`dict(['a', 'b', 'c', 'd'])` is an error in Python:

> ValueError: dictionary update sequence element #0 has length 1; 2 is required

A bit more complex, using ``set_fact`` and a ``loop`` to create/update a dictionary with key value pairs from 2 lists:

.. code-block:: YAML+Jinja
 :caption: Using set_fact to create a dictionary from a set of lists
 :emphasize-lines: 3, 4

     - name: Uses 'combine' to update the dictionary and 'zip' to make pairs of both lists
       set_fact:
         mydict: "{{ mydict|default({}) | combine({item[0]: item[1]}) }}"
       loop: "{{ (keys| zip(values))|list }}"
       vars:
         keys:
           - foo
           - var
           - bar
         values:
           - a
           - b
           - c

This results in ``{"foo": "a", "var": "b", "bar": "c"}``.

> You can even combine these simple examples with other filters and looups to create a dictionary dynamically by matching patterns to variable names:

Reviewer 6: smal typo: looups -> lookups

.. _complex_data_manipulation:

> data manipulation

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Data manipulation
```

> Complex data manipulation

Reviewer 8: "Advanced" instead of "Complex" ? for me this is complex (because I'm not used to it) and advanced (because I never use that)

Reviewer 9: I think data is complex and syntax is advance.

#########################

In many cases, you need to do some complex operation with your variables, while Ansible is not recommended as a data processing/manipulation tool, you can use the existing Jinja2 templating in conjunction with the many added Ansible filters, lookups and tests to do some very complex transformations.

Let's start with a quick definition of each type of plugin:
  - lookups: Mainly used to query 'external data', in Ansible these were the primary part of loops using the ``with_<lookup>`` construct, but they can be used independently to return data for processing. They normally return a list due to their primary function in loops as mentioned previously. Used with the ``lookup`` or ``query`` Jinja2 operators.
  - filters: used to change/transform data, used with the ``|`` Jinja2 operator.
  - tests: used to validate data, used with the ``is`` Jinja2 operator.

.. _note:
   * Some tests and filters are provided directly by Jinja2, so their availability depends on the Jinja2 version, not Ansible.

.. _for_loops_or_list_comprehensions:

Loops and list comprehensions
=============================

> Most programming languages have loops (``for``, ``while``, etc.) and list comprehensions to do transformations on lists including lists of objects, Jinja2 has a few filters that provide this functionality: ``map``, ``select``, ``reject``, ``selectattr``, ``rejectattr``.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Most programming languages have loops (``for``, ``while``, etc.) and list comprehensions to do transformations on lists including lists of objects. Jinja2 has a few filters that provide this functionality: ``map``, ``select``, ``reject``, ``selectattr``, ``rejectattr``.
```

> Most programmers are used to use loops (``for``, ``while``, etc.) and list comprehensions to do transformations on lists including lists of objects, Jinja2 has a few filters that provide this functionality: ``map``, ``select``, ``reject``, ``selectattr``, ``rejectattr``.

Reviewer 8: Are you sure the audience are only programmers ? I like to think the power of Ansible is to widen the audience than developers to sysadmin as well, I'm a sysadmin and while I can write bash or python script (I know list comprehension but not sure every people reading are aware of what it is) I would not call me programmer.

If this first part is to do an analogy with "standard" programming language, we could write that differently, like ``programming languages have loops .... lists of objects``

Reviewer 9: Done.

>   - map: this is a basic for loop that just allows you to change every item in a list, using the 'attribute' keyword you can do the transformation based on attributes of the list elements.
>   - select/reject: this is a for loop with a condition, that allows you to create a subset of a list that matches (or not) based on the result of the condition.
>   - selectattr/rejectattr: very similar to the above but it uses a specific attribute of the list elements for the conditional statement.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- map: this is a basic for loop that just allows you to change every item in a list, using the 'attribute' keyword you can do the transformation based on attributes of the list elements.
- select/reject: this is a for loop with a condition, that allows you to create a subset of a list that matches (or not) based on the result of the condition.
- selectattr/rejectattr: very similar to the above but it uses a specific attribute of the list elements for the conditional statement.
```

.. _keys_from_dict_matching_list:

Extract keys from a dictionary matching elements from a list
------------------------------------------------------------

The Python equivalent code would be:

.. code-block:: python

> 

Reviewer 8: for the completeness, I'd add a line with what contains `chains` on all examples down there

    chains = [1, 2]
    for chain in chains:
        for config in chains_config[chain]['configs']:
            print(config['type'])

There are several ways to do it in Ansible, this is just one example:

.. code-block:: YAML+Jinja
 :emphasize-lines: 3
 :caption: Way to extract matching keys from a list of dictionaries

  tasks:
    - name: Show extracted list of keys from a list of dictionaries
      debug: msg="{{ chains | map('extract', chains_config) | map(attribute='configs') | flatten | map(attribute='type') | flatten }}"
      vars:
        chains: [1, 2]
        chains_config:
            1:
                foo: bar
                configs:
                    - type: routed
                      version: 0.1
                    - type: bridged
                      version: 0.2
            2:
                foo: baz
                configs:
                    - type: routed
                      version: 1.0
                    - type: bridged
                      version: 1.1

> .. code-block:: none

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: ansible-output
```

.. code-block:: YAML+Jinja
 :caption: Use selectattr to filter mounts into list I can then sort and select the last from
 :emphasize-lines: 7

   - hosts: all
     gather_facts: True
     vars:
        path: /var/lib/cache
     tasks:
     - name: The mount point for {{path}}, found using the Ansible mount facts, [-1] is the same as the 'last' filter
       debug: msg="{{(ansible_facts.mounts | selectattr('mount', 'in', path) | list | sort(attribute='mount'))[-1]['mount']}}"

Omit elements from a list
-------------------------

The special ``omit`` variable ONLY works with module options, but we can still use it in other ways as an identifier to tailor a list of elements:

.. code-block:: YAML+Jinja
 :caption: Inline list filtering when feeding a module option
 :emphasize-lines: 3, 7

    - name: enable a list of Windows features, by name
      win_feature:
        name: "{{ namestuff | reject('equalto', omit) | list }}"
      state: absent
      vars:
        namestuff:
          - "{{ (fs_installed_smb_v1 | default(False)) | ternary(omit, 'FS-SMB1') }}"

>           - "foo"

Reviewer 8: That would help to put real features, so someone who want to test, can just make a copy-paste. (I don't know windows so can't help)

Reviewer 8: real features that does not break things by the way :)

          - "bar"

Another way is to avoid adding elements to the list in the first place, so you can just use it directly:

.. code-block:: YAML+Jinja

>  :caption: using set_fact in a loop to increment a list conditionally

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 :caption: Using set_fact in a loop to increment a list conditionally
```

 :emphasize-lines: 3, 4, 6

    - name: build unique list with some items conditionally omittted
      set_fact:
         namestuff: ' {{ (namestuff | default([])) | union([item]) }}'
      when: item != omit
      loop:
          - "{{ (fs_installed_smb_v1 | default(False)) | ternary(omit, 'FS-SMB1') }}"
          - "foo"
          - "bar"

.. _complex_type_transfomations:

Complex Type transformations
=============================

> Jinja provides filters for simple data type transformations (int, bool, etc), but when you want to transform data structures things are not as easy.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Jinja provides filters for simple data type transformations (``int``, ``bool``, etc), but when you want to transform data structures things are not as easy.
```

Reviewer 4: This one's missing.

You can use loops and list comprehensions as shown above to help, also other filters and lookups can be chained and leveraged to achieve more complex transformations.

.. _create_dictionary_from_list:

Create dictionary from list
---------------------------

In most languages it is easy to create a dictionary (a.k.a. map/associative array/hash etc.) from a list of pairs, in Ansible there are a couple of ways to do it and the best one for you might depend on the source of your data.

These example produces ``{"a": "b", "c": "d"}``

.. code-block:: YAML+Jinja
 :caption: Simple list to dict by assuming the list is [key, value , key, value, ...]

  vars:
      single_list: [ 'a', 'b', 'c', 'd' ]
      mydict: "{{ dict(single_list) | slice(2) | list }}"

.. code-block:: YAML+Jinja

>  :caption: its simpler when it is a list of pairs:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 :caption: It is simpler when we have a list of pairs:
```

A bit more complex, using ``set_fact`` and a ``loop`` to create/update a dictionary with key value pairs from 2 lists:

.. code-block:: YAML+Jinja
 :caption: Using set_fact to create a dictionary from a set of lists
 :emphasize-lines: 3, 4

     - name: Uses 'combine' to update the dictionary and 'zip' to make pairs of both lists
       set_fact:
         mydict: "{{ mydict | default({}) | combine({item[0]: item[1]}) }}"
       loop: "{{ (keys | zip(values)) | list }}"
       vars:
         keys:
           - foo
           - var
           - bar
         values:
           - a
           - b
           - c

This results in ``{"foo": "a", "var": "b", "bar": "c"}``.

You can even combine these simple examples with other filters and lookups to create a dictionary dynamically by matching patterns to variable names:

.. code-block:: YAML+Jinja
 :caption: Using 'vars' to define dictionary from a set of lists without needing a task

    vars:
        myvarnames: "{{ q('varnames', '^my') }}"
        mydict: "{{ dict(myvarnames | zip(q('vars', *myvarnames))) }}"

> A quick explanation, since there is a lot to unpack from these 2 lines

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A quick explanation, since there is a lot to unpack from these two lines:
```

>  - The 'varnames' lookup returns a list of variables that match 'begin with "my"'

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 - The ``varnames`` lookup returns a list of variables that match "begin with ``my``".
```

>  - When feeding the list from the previous step into the 'vars' lookup to get the list of values.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 - Then feeding the list from the previous step into the ``vars`` lookup to get the list of values.
```

   The ``*`` is used to 'dereference the list' (a pythonism that works in Jinja), otherwise it would take the list as a single argument.

>  - Both lists get passed to the 'zip' filter to pair them off into a unified list (key, value, key2, value2, ...)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 - Both lists get passed to the ``zip`` filter to pair them off into a unified list (key, value, key2, value2, ...).
```

Complex data manipulation
#########################

In many cases you need to do some complex operation with your variables, while Ansible is not recommended as a data processing/manipulation tool, you can use the existing Jinja2 templating in conjunction with the many added ansible filters, lookups and tests to do some very complex transformations.

A quick definition of each type of plugin before we go forward
  - lookups: Mainly used to query 'external data', in Ansible these were the primary part of loops using the `with_<lookup>` construct, but they can be used independantly to return data for processing. They normally returna list due to their primary function in loops as mentioned previouslly. Used with the ``lookup`` or ``query`` Jinja2 operators.

>   - filters: used to change/transform data, used mainly with the ``|`` Jinja2 operator.

Reviewer 10: s/mainly //

Author: map/select as the 'other usage', so they are not exclusively used with | or is

>   - tests: used to validate data, used mainly with the ``is`` Jinja2 operator.

Reviewer 10: I think s/mainly //  (Is there an alternate way to use tests?)

Reviewer 10: Probably should have a seealso for each of these three plugin types to the list of plugins of that type

Author: ^ responded above, map is alternate for filters select/reject for tests

.. _for_loops_or_list_comprehensions:
For loops and/or list comprehensions
====================================

Most programmers are used to using a for loop (or while and others) and list comprehensions to do transformations on lists or lists of objects, Jinja2 has a few filters that provide this functionality: map, select, reject, selectattr, rejectattr

 - map: this is a basic for loop that just allows you to transform every item in a list, using the 'attribute' keyword you can do the transformation based on a attribute of the list element.

> 

Reviewer 10: May need to list the Jinja2 minimum version here? (Or do we not have to worry about that because we're no longer supporting installing on the RHEL6 python-2.6 stack?)

Author: added note

 - select/reject: this is a for loop with a conditional, that allows you to create a subset of a list that matches (or not) a condition
 - selectattr/rejectattr: very similar to the above but it uses a specific attribute of the list element for the conditional

Examples
========

.. _keys_from_dict_matching_list:

> Extract keys form a dictionary matching elements from a list

Reviewer 10: s/form/from/

------------------------------------------------------------

.. code::

  tasks:
    - debug: msg="{{ chains|map('extract', chains_config)|map(attribute='configs')|flatten|map(attribute='type')|flatten }}"
      vars:
        chains = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
        chains_config:
            1:
                foo: bar
                configs:
                    - type: routed
                      version: 0.1
                    - type: bridged
                      version: 0.2
            2:
                foo: baz
                configs:
                    - type: routed
                      version: 1.0
                    - type: bridged
                      version: 1.1
Results in::

    ok: [localhost] => {
        "msg": [
            "routed",
            "bridged",
            "routed",
            "bridged"
        ]
    }

The equivalent pseudo code would be::

    for each chain in chains
        for each config in chains_config[chain]['configs']
            print config['type']
        end for

>     end for

Reviewer 10: I'd start with the pseudo-code since it expresses the idea that people will want to translate from.

Using python instead of arbitrary pseudo code is probably better.  For instance, we can get the code syntax highlighted and people can consult python documentation (or run it in a python shell) if they're confused about a nuance of the example.

.. _for_loops_or_list_comprehensions:
For loops and/or list comprehensions
====================================

Most programmers are used to using a for loop (or while and others) and list comprehensions to do transformations on lists or lists of objects, Jinja2 has a few filters that provide this functionality: map, select, reject, selectattr, rejectattr

 - map: this is a basic for loop that just allows you to transform every item in a list, using the 'attribute' keyword you can do the transformation based on a attribute of the list element.

 - select/reject: this is a for loop with a conditional, that allows you to create a subset of a list that matches (or not) a condition
 - selectattr/rejectattr: very similar to the above but it uses a specific attribute of the list element for the conditional

Examples
========

.. _keys_from_dict_matching_list:
Extract keys from a dictionary matching elements from a list
------------------------------------------------------------

The equivalent pseudo code would be::

    for each chain in chains
        for each config in chains_config[chain]['configs']
            print config['type']
        end for

>     end for

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
This recipe performs the equivalent of this pseudo-code:

.. code-block:: python
    for chain in chains:
        for config in chains_config[chain]['configs']:
            print(config['type'])
```
